---
layout: problemset_topology_munkres2e
title: Homework 4
parent: (hidden)
permalink: hidden/mth_532_hw5
nav_order: 1
---

* TOC
{:toc}

---

<div class='problem_stmt' markdown='1'>

### Problem 69.4
Show that if $G = G_1 \oplus G_2$ where $G_1$ and $G_2$ are cyclic of orders $m$ and $n$, respectively, then $m$ and $n$ are not uniquely determined by $G$ in general. *[Hint: If $m$ and $n$ are relatively prime, show that $G$ is cyclic of order $mn$]*

{: .no_toc}
#### Lemma.

Let $G = G_1 \oplus G_2$ where $G_1$ and $G_2$ are cyclic of orders $n_1$ and $n_2$, respectively, where $n_1$ and $n_2$ be co-prime. WTS that $G$ is cyclic of order $n_1n_2$.

Since $G_1$ is cyclic, there exists a generator $g_1 \in G_1$. Similarly, there exists a generator $g_2 \in G_2$.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
1. Recall that all cyclic groups are abelian. So, we'll use using additive notation for this proof.
2. Recall Bezout's Identity. Given $x,y \in \Z$, there exists  $a,b \in Z$ such that

   $$ ax+by=\gcd(x,y) $$

   This can be extended into: Given, $x,y \in \Z$ with $\gcd(x,y) = d$ and given $k \in Z$, there exist $a,b \in \Z$ such that

   $$ ax+by=k\gcd(x,y) $$

3. Note that for abelian groups, the finite direct sum and the finite cartesian product are the [same](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/39895/the-direct-sum-oplus-versus-the-cartesian-product-times).

   That is, $$\begin{align*}
      f: G_1 \times G_2 &\to G_1 \oplus G_2 \\
      (g_1, g_2) &\mapsto g_1 + g_2
   \end{align*}$$ is an isomorphism.

   I ended up not using this but it might be helpful later so it stays.
</div>

WTS that there exists $g \in G$ such that for all $h \in G$, there exists $r \in Z$ such that $rg = h$. Let $h = h_1 + h_2 \in G$.

Since for $i=1,2$, $h_i \in G_i = \ket{g_i}$, there exist $r_i \in Z$ such that

$$
  h_1 = r_1g_1 \text{ and } h_2 = r_2g_2.
$$

Since $n_1, n_2$ are co-prime (that is $\gcd(n_1, n_2) = 1$), by Bezout's Theorem, there exist $k_1, k_2 \in \Z$ such that

$$
  k_1n_1 + k_2n_2 = r_2 - r_1.
$$

Then, rearranging the terms,

$$
  k_1n_1 + r_1 = -k_2n_2 + r_2.
$$

Let $r = k_1n_1 + r_1$ and $g = g_1 + g_2$. Then,

$$\begin{align*}
  r(g) &= r(g_1 + g_2) \\
    &= (k_1n_1 + r_1)(g_1 + g_2) \\
    &= (k_1n_1 + r_1)(g_1) + (-k_2n_2 + r_2)(g_2) \\
    &= k_1n_1g_1 + r_1g_1 + -k_2n_2g_2+ r_2g_2 \\
    &= k_1(0) + h_1 -k_2(0) + h_2 \\
    &= h_1 + h_2 = h.
\end{align*}
$$

Therefore, $G$ is cyclic with generator $g_1 + g_2$.

WTS that $G$ is cyclic of order $n_1n_2$.
{: .remove-bottom-margin}
1. Let $h = h_1 + h_2 \in G$. Then, there exist $r_1, r_2$ such that $h_1 = r_1g_1$ and $h2 = r_2g_2$. Then,

   $$ \begin{align*}
    (n_1n_2)(h) &= (n_1n_2)(r_1g_1 + r_2g_2) \\
      &= r_1n_2(n_1g_1) + r_2n_1(n_2g_2) \\
      &= 0 + 0 = 0.
   \end{align*}
   $$

   Therefore, $\abs{G} \leq n_1n_2$.

2. By Lagrange's Theorem, $\abs{G}$ must be a divisor of $n_1n_2$. However, the only divisors of $n_1n_2$ are $1, n_1, n_2, n_1n_2$. Therefore, $\abs{G} = n_1n_2$.

{: .no_toc}
#### Counter-example.

Consider

$$
  \Z_{(2)(3)} \oplus \Z_{(5)}
  \isom \Z_{(2)(3)(5)}
  \isom \Z_{(2)} \oplus \Z_{(3)(5)}
$$

Here, $G = \Z_{(2)(3)(5)}$ can be decomposed into direct sums of more than one pair of subgroups, $G_1$ and $G_2$. Therefore, $G$ does not uniquely determine the orders of $G_1$ and $G_2$.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
Recall that for all cyclic groups $G$ of order $k$,
$G \isom \Z_k$. Then, this counter-example works for cyclic groups in general.
</div>


</div>

---


<div class='problem_stmt' markdown='1'>

### Problem 70.3(a)
1. Show that if $G_1$ and $G_2$ have finite presentations, so does $G_1 * G_2$.
{: .lower-alpha}


{: .no_toc}
#### Part (a).
Let $G = G_1 * G_2$. Assume that $G_1$ and $G_2$ have finite presentations. That is,

$$
  G_1 = \ket{a_1, \dots, a_n \vbar r_1, \dots, r_m}, \\
  G_2 = \ket{b_1, \dots, b_k \vbar s_1, \dots, s_l}
$$

Define $H_1 = \ket{a_1, \dots, a_n}$ and $H_2 = \ket{b_1, \dots, b_k}$, both free groups generated by generators of $G_1$ and $G_2$ respectively.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
**Notation**. Let $A$ be a subset of a group $G$.
Define $\ket{A}^G$ be the normal closure of $A$ in a group $G$. That is,

$$
 \ket{A}^G = \set{
   g\inv{a}g : g \in G, a \in A
 },
$$

the set of all conjugates of $A$ in $G$. By definition, this is the smallest normal subgroup (or least normal subgroup) of $G$ containing $A$.
</div>

Define $N_1 = \ket{r_1, \dots, r_m}^{G_1}$ and $N_2 = \ket{s_1, \dots, s_l}^{G_2}$. Then, by definition of presentation,

$$
G_1 = \quotient{H_1}{N_1} \text{ and }
G_2 = \quotient{H_2}{N_2}
$$

Define $H = \ket{a_1, \dots, a_n, b_1, \dots, b_k} = H_1 * H_2$ and $N = \ket{r_1, \dots, r_m, s_1, \dots, s_l}^G$. Then, $N$ is the least normal subgroup containing both $N_1$ and $N_2$. Using Theorem 68.7, we get

$$\begin{align}
 G &= G_1 * G_2 \\
   &= \paren{\quotient{H_1}{N_1}} * \paren{\quotient{H_2}{N_2}} \\
   &\overset{\text{Thm } 68.7}{=} \quotient{H}{N} \\
   &= \ket{
     a_1, \dots, a_n, b_1, \dots, b_k \vbar
     r_1, \dots, r_m, s_1, \dots, s_l
   }
\end{align}
$$

Therefore, $G$ is finitely presented.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt' markdown='1'>

### Problem 71.2
Suppose $X$ is a space that is the union of closed subspaces $X_1, \dots, X_n$. Assume there is a point $p$ of $X$ such that $X_i \cap X_j = \set{p}$ for $i \neq j$. Then, we call $X$ the **wedge** of the spaces $X_1, \dots, X_n$, and write $X_1 \vee \dots \vee X_n$.

Show that if for each $i$, the point $p$ is a deformation retract of an open set $W_i$ of $X_i$, then $\fundgroup(X,p)$ is the external free product of the groups $\fundgroup(X_i, p)$ relative to the monomorphisms induced by the inclusion.

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.
First, assume that $X_i$ is path connected for all $i$. Since $X$ is the union of path-connected subspaces with a point in common, $X$ is path connected.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
We assume this since otherwise, we can't apply the Seifert van-Kampen theorem. However, it might be possible to do this proof without this assumption ([see here](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/3183092/fundamental-group-of-wedge-sum-does-munkres-assume-path-connectedness)) by considering the path-components of $X_i$. It might be helpful to know that when considering the fundamental group of a space $Y$,

$$
\fundgroup(Y,q) = \fundgroup(Y(q),q)
$$

where $Y(q)$ is the path component of $Y$ that contains $p$. In other words, all loops considered in $\fundgroup(Y,q)$ are paths in $Y(q)$. So, all equivalence classes of $\fundgroup(Y,q)$ live in $Y(q)$.
</div>

Next, assume that for each $i$, the point $p$ is a deformation retract of an open set $W_i$ of $X_i$. Define a new spaces $Y_k$ by

$$
  Y_k = X_1 \vee \dots \vee X_k \text{ for } k \in \set{1, \dots, n}
$$

We'll proceed by induction on $k$.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
For this proof, we deal with image of $\fundgroup(X_i,p)$ under the induced map of the inclusion. To simplify notation, we'll use $\fundgroup(X_i,p)$ for the image.
</div>

For the base case, consider one space in the wedge. Then, $Y_1 = X_1$ and $\fundgroup(Y_1,p) = \fundgroup(X_1,p)$. Then, $\fundgroup(Y_1,p)$ is a free product vacuously.

For the inductive case, let $k \in \set{1, \dots, n-1}$ be such that for $Y_k$,

$$
  \fundgroup(Y_k,p) = \fundgroup(X_1,p) * \dots * \fundgroup(X_k,p).
$$

WTS that $\fundgroup(Y_{k+1},p)$ is a free product of the fundamental groups of $X_1, \dots, X_{k+1}$.

From the problem statement, there exists $W_i \subseteq X_i$ that deformation retracts to $\set{p}$. Then, $W_i$ must contain $p$,
and $W_i$ must be path-connected for all $i$ ([see here](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/3565266/why-a-deformation-retract-mapping-to-a-single-point-would-imply-path-connectedne)).

Define $U$ and $V$ as follows

$$\begin{align*}
U &= W_1 \cup \dots \cup W_k \cup X_{k+1} \\
V &= X_1 \cup \dots \cup X_k \cup W_{k+1}
\end{align*}$$

Then, $U \cap V = W_1 \cup \dots \cup W_{k+1}$. We have a number of things to check.
{: .remove-bottom-margin}
1. Check that $U$ is open in $X$.

   Recall that $X_i \cap X_j = \set{p}$ for $i \neq j$. When looking at the complement of a set in $X$, we can look at the complement of each part of $X$ in $X_i$. Therefore,

   $$\begin{align*}
    X \setminus U
      &= (X_1 \setminus W_1) \cup \dots \cup
         (X_k \setminus W_k) \cup
         (X_{k+1} \setminus X_{k+1}) \\
      &= (X_1 \setminus W_1) \cup \dots \cup
         (X_k \setminus W_k)
   \end{align*}$$

   For $i=1, \dots, k$, recall that $W_i$ is open in $X_i$. Therefore, $X_i \setminus W_i$ is closed in $X_i$. Since $X_i$ is closed in $X$, $X_1 \setminus W_i$ is closed in $X$. Then, $X \setminus U$ is a finite union of closed sets in $X$ and is therefore closed. Thus, $U$ is open.

2. Check that $V$ is open in $X$.

   By similar argument in item (1),

   $$\begin{align*}
    X \setminus V
      &= (X_1 \setminus X_1) \cup \dots \cup
         (X_k \setminus X_k) \cup
         (X_{k+1} \setminus W_{k+1})
         \\
      &= X_{k+1} \setminus W_{k+1}
   \end{align*}$$

   Since $X_{k+1} \setminus W_{k+1}$ is closed in $X_{k+1}$ and $X_{k+1}$ closed in $X$, $X \setminus V$ is closed in $X$. Therefore, $V$ is open in $X$.

3. $U$, $V$, and $U \cap V$ are path connected as the union of path connected spaces with a point in common.

Therefore, the Seifert-van Kampen theorem applies. Now, consider the fundamental groups of $U$, $V$, and $U \cap V$.
{: .remove-bottom-margin}
1. Calculate $\fundgroup(U, p)$.
   Recall that $W_i \sim \set{p}$ where $\sim$ is the homotopy relation on spaces (in particular, the deformation retraction of $W_i \to \set{p}$ is a homotopy equivalence). Therefore,

   $$\begin{align*}
    U &= W_1 \cup \dots \cup W_k \cup X_{k+1} \\
      &\sim \set{p} \cup \dots \cup \set{p} cup X_{k+1} \\
      &= X_{k+1}
   \end{align*}$$

   Recall that if two spaces are homotopic, then their fundamental groups are equal. Therefore, $\fundgroup(U,p) = \fundgroup(X_{k+1}, p)$.

2. Calculate $\fundgroup(V, p)$.
   Using similar arguments as in (1),

   $$\begin{align*}
    V &= X_1 \cup \dots \cup X_k \cup W_{k+1} \\
      &\sim X_1 \cup \dots \cup X_k \cup \set{p} \\
      &= X_1 \cup \dots \cup X_k
   \end{align*}$$

   By the inductive hypothesis,

   $$\begin{align*}
    \fundgroup(V, p)
      &= \fundgroup(X_1 \cup \dots \cup X_k) \\
      &= \fundgroup(Y_k) \\
      &= \fundgroup(X_1) * \dots \fundgroup(X_k)
   \end{align*}$$

3. Calculate $\fundgroup(U \cap V)$.
   Using similar arguments as in (1),

   $$\begin{align*}
    U \cap V &= W_1 \cup \dots \cup W_{k+1} \\
      &\sim \set{p} \cup \dots \cup \set{p} \\
      &= \set{p}
   \end{align*}$$

   Therefore, $\fundgroup(U \cap V, p)$ is trivial.

Then, by Seifert-van Kampen (in particular, Corollary 70.3),

$$\begin{align*}
 \fundgroup(X,p)
    &\isom \fundgroup(U,p) * \fundgroup(V,p) \\
    &= (\fundgroup(X_{k+1}, p) * (\fundgroup(X_1) * \dots \fundgroup(X_k)) \\
    &= \fundgroup(X_1,p) \dots \fundgroup(X_{k+1},p)
\end{align*}$$

Recall that the free product operation is commutative and associative.

By induction, the proposition is true.

</div>

---
