---
layout: problemset
title: Section 68 Free Products of Groups
parent: Chapter 11 The Seifert-van Kampen Theorem
grand_parent: Topology, Munkres 2e Solutions
permalink: topology_munkres_solutions/section68
nav_order: 68
---

* TOC
{:toc}

---

<div class='problem_stmt' markdown='1'>

### Problem 68.1
Check the details of Example 1.
{: .remove-bottom-margin}
<dl>
  <dt>Example 1</dt>
  <dd>
    Consider the group $P$ of bijections of the set $\set{0,1,2}$ with itself. For $i = 1,2$, define an element $\pi_i$ of $P$ by setting $\pi_i(i) = i-1$ and $\pi_i(i-1) = i$ and $\pi_i(j) = j$ otherwise. Then $\pi_1$ generates a subgroup $G_i$ of $P$ of order $2$. The groups $G_1$ and $G_2$ generate $P$, as you can check. But $P$ is not their free product. The reduced words $(\pi_1, \pi_2, \pi_1)$ and $(\pi_2, \pi_1, \pi_2)$ represent the same element of $P$.
  </dd>
</dl>

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt' markdown='1'>

### Problem 68.2
Let $G = G_1 * G_2$, where $G_1$ and $G_2$ are nontrivial groups.
{: .remove-bottom-margin}
1. Show $G$ is not abelian.
2. If $x \in G$, define the *length* of $x$ to be the length of the unique reduced word in the elements of $G_1$ and $G_2$ that represents $x$. Show that if $x$ has even length (at least 2), then $x$ does not have finite order. Show that if $x$ has odd length (at least 3), then $x$ is conjugate to an element of shorter length.
3. Show that the only elements of $G$ that have finite order are the elements of $G_1$ and $G_2$ that have finite order, and their conjugates.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt' markdown='1'>

### Problem 68.3
Let $G = G_1 * G_2$. Given $c \in G$, let $cG_1c^{-1}$ denote the set of all elements of the form $cxc^{-1}$ for $x \in G_1$. It is a subgroup of $G$. Show that its intersection with $G_2$ consists of the identity alone.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt' markdown='1'>

### Problem 68.4
Prove **Theorem 68.4 Uniqueness of Free Products**.

Let $\set{G_\alpha}_{\alpha \in J}$ be a family of groups. Suppose $G$ and $G'$ are groups and $i\_{\alpha}: G\_\alpha \to G$ and $i'\_{\alpha}: G\_\alpha \to G'$ are families of monomorphism, such that the families $\set{i\_\alpha(G\_\alpha)}$ and $\set{i'\_\alpha(G\_\alpha)}$ generate $G$ and $G'$ respectively. If both $G$ and $G'$ have the extension property stated in the preceding lemma, then there is a unique isomorphism $\phi: G \to G'$ such that $\phi \circ i\_\alpha = i'\_\alpha$ for all $\alpha$.

</div>
