---
layout: problemset_topology_munkres2e
title: Section 70 The Seifert-van Kampen Theorem
parent: Chapter 11 The Seifert-van Kampen Theorem
grand_parent: Topology, Munkres 2e Solutions
permalink: topology_munkres_solutions/section70
nav_order: 70
---

In this section, we prove the Seifert-van Kampen Theorem and some of its corollaries.

For all the problems in this section, assume the hypothesis of the Seifert-van Kampen theorem. That is...

Let $X = U \cup V$ where $U$ and $V$ are open in $X$. Assume that $U$, $V$, and $U \cap V$ are path connected. Let $x_0 \in U \cap V$.

* TOC
{:toc}

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 70.1
Suppose that the homomorphism $i_\star$ induced by the inclusion $i: U \cap V \to X$ is trivial.
{: .remove-bottom-margin}
1. Show that $j_1$ and $j_2$ induce an epimorphism (surjective homomorphism)

   $$
    h: \paren{\quotient{ \fundgroup(U, x_0) }{ N_1 }} *
    \paren{\quotient{ \fundgroup(V, x_0) }{ N_2 }}
    \to
    \fundgroup(X, x_0)
   $$

   where $N_1$ is the least normal subgroup of $\fundgroup(U, x_0)$ containing image $i_1$, and $N_2$ is the least normal subgroup of $\fundgroup(V, x_0)$ containing image $i_2$.

2. Show that $h$ is an isomorphism.
   <div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
   Use Theorem 70.1 to define a left inverse for $h$.
   </div>

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 70.2

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 70.3(a)
Show that if $G_1$ and $G_2$ have finite presentations, so does $G_1 * G_2$.

{: .no_toc}
#### PROOF.
Let $G = G_1 * G_2$. Assume that $G_1$ and $G_2$ have finite presentations. That is,

$$
  G_1 = \ket{a_1, \dots, a_n \vbar r_1, \dots, r_m}, \\
  G_2 = \ket{b_1, \dots, b_k \vbar s_1, \dots, s_l}
$$

Define $H_1 = \ket{a_1, \dots, a_n}$ and $H_2 = \ket{b_1, \dots, b_k}$, both free groups generated by generators of $G_1$ and $G_2$ respectively.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
**Notation**. Let $A$ be a subset of a group $G$.
Define $\ket{A}^G$ be the normal closure of $A$ in a group $G$. That is,

$$
 \ket{A}^G = \set{
   g\inv{a}g : g \in G, a \in A
 },
$$

the set of all conjugates of $A$ in $G$. By definition, this is the smallest normal subgroup (or least normal subgroup) of $G$ containing $A$.
</div>

Define $N_1 = \ket{r_1, \dots, r_m}^{H_1}$ and $N_2 = \ket{s_1, \dots, s_l}^{H_2}$. Then, by definition of presentation,

$$
G_1 = \quotient{H_1}{N_1} \text{ and }
G_2 = \quotient{H_2}{N_2}
$$

Define $H = \ket{a_1, \dots, a_n, b_1, \dots, b_k} = H_1 * H_2$ and $N = \ket{r_1, \dots, r_m, s_1, \dots, s_l}^H$. Then, $N$ is the least normal subgroup containing both $N_1$ and $N_2$. Using Theorem 68.7, we get

$$\begin{align}
 G &= G_1 * G_2 \\
   &= \paren{\quotient{H_1}{N_1}} * \paren{\quotient{H_2}{N_2}} \\
   &\overset{\text{Thm } 68.7}{=} \quotient{H}{N} \\
   &= \ket{
     a_1, \dots, a_n, b_1, \dots, b_k \vbar
     r_1, \dots, r_m, s_1, \dots, s_l
   }
\end{align}
$$

Therefore, $G$ is finitely presented.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt has_issues' markdown='1'>

### Problem 70.3(b)
Show that if $\fundgroup(U \cap V, x_0)$ is finitely generated and $\fundgroup(U, x_0)$ and $\fundgroup(V, x_0)$ have finite presentations, then $\fundgroup(X, x_0)$ has a finite presentation.

   <div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
   Hint: If $N'$ is a normal subgroup of $\fundgroup(U,x_0) * \fundgroup(V, x_0)$ that contains the elements $i_1(g_i)\inv{i_2}(g_i)$ where $g_i$ runs over a set of generators for $\fundgroup(U \cap V, x_0)$, then $N'$ contains $i_1(g)\inv{i_2}(g)$ for arbitrary $g$.
   </div>

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.

{: .no_toc}
#### Part (b).
Assume the hypothesis for the Seifert-van Kampen theorem. Additionally, suppose that

$$\begin{align*}
  \fundgroup(U \cap V)
    &= \ket{ g_1, \dots, g_p \st \emptyset } \\
  \fundgroup(U)
    &= \ket{ x_1, \dots, x_m \st r_1, \dots, r_n } \\
  \fundgroup(V)
    &= \ket{ y_1, \dots, y_k \st s_1, \dots, s_l }
\end{align*}$$

Define the surjective homomorphism $j: \fundgroup(U) * \fundgroup(V) \to \fundgroup(U \cap V)$ by Seifert-van Kampen.

First, we need to identify $\ker{j}$. According to Seifert-van Kampen,

$$
\ker{j} = \ket{ (i_1(g)\inv, i_2(g)) : g \in \fundgroup(U \cap V) }^\star
$$

where $\ket{\cdot}^\star$ denotes that normal closure of $\cdot$ in
$\fundgroup(U) * \fundgroup(V)$.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
  We'll use the hint for this. WTS

  $$
   \ker{j} = \ket{ (i_1(g)\inv, i_2(g)) : g \in \set{g_1, \dots, g_p} }^\star
  $$

  Define $N' = \ket{ (i_1(g)\inv, i_2(g)) : g \in \set{g_1, \dots, g_p} }^\star$.
  By definition, $\N' \subseteq \ker{j}$.

  **Claim A**. Let $a, b \in \fundgroup(U \cap V, x_0)$ such that $i_1(a)\inv{i_2(a)} \in N'$ and $i_1(b)\inv{i_2(b)} \in N'$.
  Then, $i_1(ab)\inv{}i_2(ab) \in N'$.

  **Proof.**

  $$\begin{align*}
    i_1(ab)\inv{}i_2(ab)
        &= \paren{ i_1(a)i_1(b) }\inv i_2(a) i_2(b) \\
        &= i_1(b)\inv i_1(a)\inv i_2(a) i_2(b) \\
        &= i_1(b)\inv i_1(a)\inv i_2(a) (i_1(b) i_1(b)\inv) i_2(b) \\
        &=
          \underbrace{
            i_1(b)\inv \overbrace{
              i_1(a)\inv i_2(a)
              }^{\in N'} i_1(b)
          }_{\text{conjugated, so } \in N'}
          \underbrace{
            i_1(b)\inv i_2(b)
          }_{\in N'} \\
        &\in N'
  \end{align*}$$

  **Claim B**. Let $g = g_{\alpha_1}g_{\alpha_2}\cdots g_{\alpha_N}$ with each $g_{\alpha_i}$ a generator of $\fundgroup(U \cap V, x_0)$. Then, $
    i_1(g)\inv i_2(g) \in N'
  $

  **Proof.** By definition of $N'$, for all $i$, $i_1(g_{\alpha_i})\inv{}i_2(g_{\alpha_i}) \in N'$. Then, this follows from Claim A using induction on $i$.

  By Claim B,  $\N' \supseteq \ker{j}$. By mutual inclusion, the proposition is proven.
</div>

Then, according to the claim in the notes,

$$
 \ker{j} = \ket{ (i_1(g)\inv, i_2(g)) : g \in \set{g_1, \dots, g_p} }^\star.
$$

Second, we use the results from part (a). Thus,

$$
\fundgroup(U) * \fundgroup(V)
= \ket{
  \begin{matrix}x_1, \dots, x_m, \\ y_1, \dots, y_k\end{matrix}
  \st
  \begin{matrix}r_1, \dots, r_n, \\ s_1, \dots, s_l\end{matrix}
}
$$

We'll need another theorem.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
[**Theorem**](https://matthewd.hosted.uark.edu/3113/aanotes4.pdf). Suppose $G$ is a group with presentation $\ket{S \st R}$. Suppose $N$ is a normal subgroup of $G$ with $N = \ket{T}^G$. That is, $N$ is the normal closure of $T$. We write each $a \in T$ as a word $w_a$ in $\ket{S \st \emptyset}$. Let $R'$ consist of all the equations $w_a = 1$ for $a \in T$. Then, $\quotient{G}{N}$ has presentation $\ket{S \st R \cup R'}$.

Additional reference: [this](https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/3191917/if-we-add-more-relations-to-a-presentation-will-it-always-form-a-quotient-group)

<div class='problem_issue' markdown='1'>
Not exactly sure if this is how it works. Check this later.
</div>

</div>

Then, by the First Isomorphism Theorem,

$$\begin{align*}
  \fundgroup(X, x_0)
  &= \quotient{\fundgroup(U) * \fundgroup(V)}{\ker{j}} \\
  &= \quotient{
        \ket{
          \begin{matrix}x_1, \dots, x_m, \\ y_1, \dots, y_k\end{matrix}
          \st
          \begin{matrix}r_1, \dots, r_n, \\ s_1, \dots, s_l\end{matrix}
        }
    }{
      \ket{ (i_1(g_i)\inv, i_2(g_i)) }^*
    } \\
  &= \ket{
    \begin{matrix}x_1, \dots, x_m, \\ y_1, \dots, y_k\end{matrix}
    \st
    \begin{matrix}
      r_1, \dots, r_n, s_1, \dots, s_l, \\
      (i_1(g_i)\inv, i_2(g_i)) \text{ for } i=1,\dots,p
    \end{matrix}
  }
\end{align*}$$

Therefore, $\fundgroup(X, x_0)$ has finite presentation.

</div>

---
