---
layout: problemset_topology_munkres2e
title: Section 51 Homotopy of Paths
parent: Chapter 9 The Fundamental Group
grand_parent: Topology, Munkres 2e Solutions
permalink: topology_munkres_solutions/section51
nav_order: 1
---

This section establishes the *homotopy* and *path-homotopy* equivalence relations. $\newcommand{\R}{\mathbb{R}}$

* TOC
{:toc}

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 51.1
Show that if $h, h': X \to Y$ are homotopic and $k, k':Y \to Z$ are homotopic, then $k \circ h$ and $k' \circ h'$ are homotopic.

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.
Let $h, h': X \to Y$ and $k, k': Y \to Z$ such that
1. there exists a homotopy $H: X \times I \to Y$ with $H(x,0) = h(x)$ and $H(x,1) = h'(x)$;
2. there exists a homotopy $K:Y \times I \to Z$ with $K(y,0) = k(y)$ and $K(y,1) = k'(y)$.

Define a function $$G: X \times I \to Z$$ by

$$ G(x,t) = K(H(x,t),t).$$

WTS that $G$ is a homotopy. Then,
1. $G$ is continuous as a composition of continuous functions;
2. $G(x,0) = K(H(x,0),0) = K(h(x), 0) = k(h(x)) = (k \circ h)(x)$ for all $x \in X$
3. $G(x,1) = K(H(x,1),1) = K(h'(x), 0) = k'(h'(x)) = (k' \circ h')(x)$ for all $x \in X$

Therefore, $k \circ h \simeq k' \circ h'$. $\blacksquare$

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 51.2
Given spaces $X$ and $Y$, let $[X,Y]$ denote the set of homotopy classes of maps of $X$ into $Y$.
{:.remove-bottom-margin}
1. Let $I = [0,1]$. Show that for any $X$, the set $[X,I]$ has a single element.
2. Show that if $Y$ is path connected, then the set $[I,Y]$ has a single element.
{:.lower-alpha}

**Proof.** Recall that $\simeq$ is an equivalence relation. That is, it is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive. We'll use transitivity of $\simeq$ to show the set of homotopy classes are trivial.

{: .no_toc}
#### Part (a).
Let $X$ be a space and let $g: X \to I$ be the constant zero map. That is, $g(x) = 0$ for all $x \in X$.

Let $f: X \to I$ be continuous. Define $H: X \times I \to I$ by $H(x,t) = tf(x)$. Then,
{:.remove-bottom-margin}
1. $H$ is continuous
2. Let $x \in X$ and $t \in I$. Then, $f(x) \in I$ and $tf(x) \in I$. Alternatively, $H$ is a straight-line homotopy. Since $I$ is convex, $H(x,t) \in I$ for all $x \in X, t \in I$.
3. $H(x,0) = (0)f(x) = 0$ and $H(x,1) = (1)f(x) = f(x)$

Therefore, $H$ is a homotopy. Therefore, for all $f,h:X \to I$ continuous, $f \simeq g \simeq h$. By transitivity of $\simeq$, $f \simeq h$. Therefore, $[X,I] = \\{[g]\\}$ is trivial. $\blacksquare$

{: .no_toc}
#### Part (b).
Let $Y$ be a path-connected space. For $y_0 \in Y$, define the constant map $e_{y_0}: I \to Y$ by $e_{y_0}(y) = y_0$ for all $y \in Y$.

Let $f,g: I \to Y$ be continuous. WTS that $f \simeq e_{f(0)} \simeq e_{g(0)} \simeq g$.

1. First, we'll show that $f \simeq e_{f(0)}$. Define $H_1: I \times I \to Y$ by $H_1(s,t)=f((s)(1-t))$. Then, $H_1$ is continuous,
$H(s,0)=f((s)(1)) = f(s)$ and $H(x,1) = f((s)(0)) = f(0)$. Therefore, $H_1$ is a homotopy.
2. Second, we'll show that $e_{f(0)} \simeq e_{g(0)}$. Recall that $Y$ is path connected. Then, there exists a path $\gamma: I \to Y$ such that $\gamma(0) = e_{f(0)}$ and $\gamma(1) = e_{g(0)}$. <br>
Define $H_2: I \times I \to Y$ by $H(s,t) = \gamma(t)$. Then, $H_2$ is continuous, $H_2(s,0) = \gamma(0) = f(0)$, and $H_2(s,1) = \gamma(1) = g(0)$. Thus, $H_2$ is a homotopy.
3. Third, we'll show that $e_{g(0)} \simeq g$. Define $H_3: I \times I \to Y$ by $H(s,t)=g(st)$. As with item (1), $H_3$ is a homotopy.

Then, by transitivity of $\simeq$, $f \simeq g$. Therefore, $[I,Y] = \\{[f]\\}$ is trivial. $\blacksquare$

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 51.3
A space $X$ is said to be *contractible* if the identity map $i_X: X \to X$ is nulhomotopic.
{:.remove-bottom-margin}
1. Show that $I$ and $\R$ are contractible.
2. Show that a contractible space is path connected.
3. Show that if $Y$ is contractible, then for any $X$, the set $[X,Y]$ has a single element.
4. Show that if $X$ is contractible and $Y$ path-connected, then $[X,Y]$ has a single element.
{:.lower-alpha}

**Proof.** Recall that $f: X \to X$ is nulhomotopic if $f \simeq e_{x_0}$ where $e_{x_0}:X \to X$ for some $x_0 \in X$ is a constant map.

{: .no_toc}
#### Part (a).
Observe that both $I$ and $\R$ are convex spaces. Then, the straight line homotopy applies. That is,
1. Define $H: I \times I \to I$ by

   $$H(s,t) = (1-t)i_I(s) + (t)(0) = (1-t)(s).$$

   Then, $H$ is continuous, $H(s,0) = s$ and $H(s,1) = s$. Therefore, $H$ is a homotopy and $i_I \simeq e_0$.
2. Define $G: \R \times I \to \R$ by

   $$H(s,t) = (1-t)i_\R(s) + (t)(0) = (1-t)(s).$$

   As with the previous case, $i_\R \simeq e_0$.

{: .no_toc}
#### Part (b).
Let $X$ be a contractible space. Then, there exists a homotopy $H: X \times I \to X$ with $H(x,0)=x$ and $H(x,1)=p$ for some $p \in X$.

Let $q \in X$. Define a path $\gamma: I \to X$ by $\gamma(t) = H(q,t)$. Then, $\gamma$ is continuous, $\gamma(0) = H(q,0) = q$, and $\gamma(1) = H(q,1) = p$.

Therefore, for all $a, b \in X$, there is a path $\alpha$ from $a$ to $p$ and a path $\beta$ from $b$ to $p$. Then, $\alpha * \bar\beta$ is a path from $a$ to $b$. Therefore, $X$ is path-connected.

{: .no_toc}
#### Part (c).
Let $X$ be a top. space and let $Y$ be a contractible space.

Then, there exists a homotopy $H: Y \times I \to Y$ such that $H(y,0) = y$ and $H(y, 1) = y_1$ for some $y_1 \in Y$.

Let $f: X \to Y$ be continuous. WTS that $f \simeq e_{y_1}$.
Define $F: X \times I \to Y$ by $F(x,t) = H(f(x), t)$. Then,
{:.remove-bottom-margin}
1. $F$ is continuous;
2. $F(x,0) = H(f(x), 0) = id_Y(f(x)) = f(x)$;
3. $F(x,1) = H(f(x), 1) = y_1$.
Therefore, $F$ is a homotopy and $f \simeq e_{y_1}$.

By transitivity of $\simeq$, $[X,Y] = \set{[f]} = \set{1}$ is trivial.

{: .no_toc}
#### Part (d).
Let $X, Y$ be spaces with $X$ contractible and $Y$ path connected.

Then, there exists a homotopy $H: X \times I \to X$ with $H(x,0) = x$ and $H(x,1)=x_1$ for some $x_1 \in X$.

Let $f: X \to Y$ be a continuous function. Fix $y_1 \in Y$.

Since $Y$ is path-connected, there exists a path $\gamma: I \to Y$ with $\gamma(0) = f(x_1)$ and $\gamma(1) = y_1$.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
  Our goal here is to create a homotopy by (1) shrinking the domain of $f$ into a single point $x_1$ at double speed and (2) moving from $f(x_1)$ to $y_1$.
</div>

Define $G: X \times I \to Y$ by

$$ G(x,t) = \begin{cases}
  f( H(x, 2t) ) & \text{ for } t \in [0, \frac{1}{2}] \\
  \gamma(2t-1) & \text{ for } t \in [\frac{1}{2}, 1]
\end{cases}
$$

Then,
{:.remove-bottom-margin}
1. Let $t = \frac{1}{2}$. Then, $f(H(x, 2t)) = f(H(x,1)) = f(x_1)$ and $\gamma(2t-1) = \gamma{0} = f(x_1)$. By the pasting lemma, $G$ is continuous.
2. $G(x,0) = f(H(x,0)) = f(x)$.
3. $G(x,1) = gamma(1) = y_1$.
Therefore, $G$ is a homotopy between $f$ and $e_{y_0}$. As with part (c), $[X,Y] = \set{[e_{y_0}]}$ is trivial.

</div>
