---
layout: problemset_topology_munkres2e
title: Section 53 Covering Spaces
parent: Chapter 9 The Fundamental Group
grand_parent: Topology, Munkres 2e Solutions
permalink: topology_munkres_solutions/section53
nav_order: 53
---

* TOC
{:toc}

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 53.1
Let $Y$ have the discrete topology. Show that if $p: X \times Y \to X$ is projection on the first coordinate, then $p$ is a covering map.

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.
Let $p: X \times Y \to X$ be defined by $(x,y) \mapsto x$. Then,
1. $p$ is continuous since it's a polynomial on its coordinates;
2. Fix $y_0 \in Y$. Then, for all $x \in X$, $p(x, y_0) = x$. Therefore, $p$ is surjective.
3. Let $x \in X$ and fix $U \subset X$ a nbhd of $x$.
   Then,

   $$\begin{align*}
    p\inv(U)
      &= \set{ (x,y): p(x,y)=x \in U } \\
      &= \set{ (x,y: x \in U, y \in Y)} \\
      &= U \times Y \\
      &= \bigcup_{y \in Y}(U \times \set{y})
   \end{align*}
   $$

   Since $Y$ has the discrete topology, $U \times \set{y}$ is open in $X \times Y$ for all $y \in Y$.

   Fix $y \in Y$. Then, define $r = p\restrict{U \times \set{y}}$ is injective and continuous. Also, with continuous inverse $r\inv(x) = (x,y)$, $r$ is surjective.

   Therefore, $U$ is evenly covered by $p$.

Therefore, $p$ is a covering map.
</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 53.2
Let $p: E \to B$ be continuous and surjective. Suppose that $U$ is an open set of $B$ that is evenly covered by $p$. Show that if $U$ is connected, then the partition of $p^{-1}(U)$ into slices is unique.

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.
Assume that $U$ is connected and let $A = \set{A_\alpha}_{\alpha \in J}$ be a pairwise disjoint collection of sets in $E$ such that the union is $p\inv(U)$. Define $P = p\inv(U)$ to have the subspace topology on $E$. We claim that the connected components of $P$ is $A$.

Let $C$ be a connected component of $P$. Since $A$ covers $P$, there exists $k \in J$ such that $A_k \cap C \neq \emptyset$.

Since $p\restrict{A_k}$ is a local homeomorphism and $U$ connected, $A_k$ is also connected. Therefore, $A_k \subseteq C$.
<span class='notes'>
  It makes sense to think about it as: $C$ is the largest connected set containing $A_k$ since $C$ is the equivalence class of all points that are connected to points in $A_k$.
</span>   

To show that $C \subseteq A_k$, suppose, FTSOC, that there exists $c \in C$ such that $c \not\in A_k$. Since $A$ covers $P$, $c \in \bigcup_{\alpha \in J, \alpha \neq k}{A_\alpha}$, which is an open set in $E$ and in $C$. Observe that $A_k$ and $\bigcup_{\alpha \in J, \alpha \neq k}{A_\alpha}$ form a separation of $C$, which contradicts $C$ being connected.

Therefore, $C = A_k$.

Then, for every connected component $C$ of $P$, there exists $k \in J$ such that $A_k = C$. Since $A$ is pairwise disjoint, $A$ represents a collection of connected components of $P$. By construction using equivalence classes, the collection of connected components is unique. Therefore, $A$ is unique.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 53.3
Let $p: E \to B$ be a covering map and let $B$ be connected. Show that if $p^{-1}(b_0)$ has $k$ elements for some $b_0 \in B$, then $p^-1(b)$ has $k$ elements for every $b \in B$. In such a case, $E$ is called a **$k$-fold covering** for $B$.

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.
Assume that there exists $b_0 \in B$ such that $| p\inv(b_0) | = k$ for some $k \in \N$. Define the set

$$ \begin{align*}
  K &= \set{b \in B: \abs{p\inv(b)} = k}.
\end{align*}
$$

Then,
1. WTS $K$ is open.

   Let $b \in K$. Since $p$ is a covering map, there exists a nbhd $U \subset B$ of $b$ that is evenly covered by $p$. That is, $p\inv(U) = \set{V_\alpha}_{\alpha \in J}$, pairwise disjoint, such that for all $\alpha \in J$, $p\restrict{V\_\alpha}: V\_\alpha \to B$ is a homeomorphism.

   Thus, for each $\alpha \in J$, $V\_\alpha$ can only contain one $e$ such that $p(e) = b_0$. Therefore, $\abs{J} = k$.

   Let $b' \in U$. Then, for each $\alpha \in J$, there is one $e' \in V_\alpha$ such that $p(e') = b'$. Since $\abs{J} = k$, $\abs{p\inv(b')} = k$. Therefore, $U \subset of K$.

   For every $b \in K$, there exists an open set $U \subset K$.
   Therefore, $K$ is open. \\
   <span class='notes'>If $K$ is empty, then the condition is vacuously true and $K$ is open.</span>
2. WTS $K$ is closed.

   Observe that the arguments for item (1) is independent of $k$. The arguments also work for $k = \infty$. Therefore, for $l \in \N$, the sets

   $$ \begin{align*}
   K_l &:= \set{b \in B: \abs{p\inv(b)} = l} \text{ and } \\
   K_\infty &:= \set{b \in B: \abs{p\inv(b)} = \infty}
   \end{align*}$$

   are open. By construction, the collection of these sets are also pairwise-disjoint.

   Define $M = \paren{\bigcup_{l \neq k}K_l} \cup K_\infty$. Then, $M$ is open as the arbitrary union of open sets.

   By construction, $K \cap M = \emptyset$ and $K \cup M = B$.
Since $B$ is connected, there exists no separation $U$ and $V$ of $B$. Therefore, either $K = \emptyset$ or $K = B$. By assumption, $K$ is non-empty. Therefore, $K = B$ and for all $b \in B$, $\abs{p\inv(b)} = k$.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 53.4
Let $q: X \to Y$ and $r: Y \to Z$ be covering maps. Let $p = r \circ q$. Show that if $r^{-1}(z)$ is finite for each $z \in Z$, then $p$ is a covering map.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 53.5
Show that the map of Example 3 is a covering map. Generalize to the map $p(z) = z^n$.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
**Example 53.3.** Consider the map $p: S^1 \to S^1$ given by $p(z)=z^2$. Here, we consider $S^1 \subset \C$. Then, $p$ is a covering map.
</div>

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.
Fix $n \in \N$. Define $p: S^1 \to S^1 \subset \C$ by $p(z) = z^n$. WTS that $p$ is a covering map.

Since $p$ is a polynomial on its coordinates, $p$ is continuous.

Let $z = e^{i\theta} \in S^1$. let $z' = e^{i\frac{\theta}{n}}$. Then, $p(z') = \paren{e^{i\frac{\theta}{n}}}^n = e^{i\theta}$. Therefore, $p$ is surjective.

Lastly, WTS that for all $z \in S^1$, there exists a nbhd $U$ of $z$ that is evenly covered by $p$.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
Recall that open sets in $S^1$ look like open arcs. Then, we can characterize a basis for the topology of $S^1$ using

$$
\set{ z = e^{i\varphi} : \varphi \in (a,b) \text{ for some } a,b \in R}
$$

In fact, we're using the topology of $\R$ to define the topology on $S^1$.

</div>

Let $z = e^{i\theta} \in S^1$. Then,

$$
  p\inv(\set{z}) = p\inv\paren{\set{e^{i\theta}}}
  = \set{
      e^{ i\paren{\frac{\theta}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
      : d = 0, \dots, n-1
    }
$$

Set $U = \set{e^{i\varphi}: \varphi \in B_\pi(\theta) = (\theta - \pi, \theta + \pi)}$. Then,

$$ \begin{align*}
  p\inv(U)
    &= \set{ p\inv(\set{e^{i\varphi}}) : \varphi \in B_\pi(0) } \\
    &= \set{
      e^{ i\paren{\frac{\varphi}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
      : \varphi \in B_\pi(0), d=0,\dots,n-1
    }.
\end{align*}
$$

Partition $U$ into the $\set{V_d}$ by

$$
  \set{V_d}_{d=0}^{n-1} = \set{
    e^{ i\paren{\frac{\varphi}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
    : \varphi \in B_\pi(0)
  }_{d=0}^{n-1}.
$$

WTS that $\set{V_d}$ is pairwise disjoint.

Assume that there exists $z \in V_{d_1} \cap V_{d_2}$ for some $d_1, d_2 \in \set{0, \dots, n-1}$. Then,

$$\begin{align*}
 q = e^{i\alpha} =
   e^{ i\paren{\frac{\varphi_1}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d_1}{n}} }
   &=
   e^{ i\paren{\frac{\varphi_2}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d_2}{n}} }
   \\
 \implies
   \frac{\varphi_1}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d_1}{n}
   &=
   \frac{\varphi_2}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d_2}{n}
   \\
 \implies
   \varphi_1 &= \varphi_2
   \\
 \implies
   \frac{\varphi_1}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d_1}{n}
   &=
   \frac{\varphi_1}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d_2}{n}
   \\
 \implies
  d_1 &= d_2
\end{align*}
$$

Therefore, $V_{d_1} = V_{d_2}$.

Fix $d \in \set{0, \dots, n-1}$. WTS that $p\restrict{V_d}$ is a homeomorphism.
{: .remove-bottom-margin}
1. $p\restrict{V_d}$ is continuous as a restriction of a cont. map.
2. Define a map

   $$\begin{align*}
    g: U &\to V_d \\
    e^{i\theta} &\mapsto
    e^{ i\paren{\frac{\theta}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
   \end{align*}$$

   Then, $g$ is continuous and maps $z$ to its $n$-th root of unity.
   WTS that $g$ is an inverse of $p\restrict{V_d}$. To simplify notation, define $h = p\restrict{V_d}$.
   1. $g$ is continuous.
   2. Let $z = e^{i\theta} \in U$. Then,

      $$\begin{align*}
        (h \circ g)(e^{i\theta})
        &= (h)\paren{
          e^{ i\paren{\frac{\theta}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
        } \\
        &= \paren{
          e^{ i\paren{\frac{\theta}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
        }^n \\
        &= e^{ i\paren{\theta + 2\pi{d}} } \\
        &= e^{i\theta}
      \end{align*}
      $$
   3. Let $z = e^{ i\paren{\frac{\theta}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} } \in V_d$. Then,

      $$\begin{align*}
        (g \circ h)\paren{
          e^{ i\paren{\frac{\theta}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
        }
        &= g\paren{
          e^{ i\paren{\frac{\theta}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
        }^n \\
        &= g\paren{e^{ i\paren{\theta + 2\pi{d}} }} \\
        &= g\paren{e^{i\theta}} \\
        &= e^{ i\paren{\frac{\theta}{n} + 2\pi\frac{d}{n}} }
      \end{align*}$$

   Since $p\restrict{V_d}$ is continuous and has a continuous inverse, then $p\restrict{V_d}$ is a homeomorphism.

Therefore, $p$ is a covering map.
</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 53.6
Let $p: E \to B$ be a covering map.
{:.remove-bottom-margin}
1. If $B$ is Hausdorff, regular, completely regular, locally compact Hausdorff, then so is $E$. *[Hint: If $\set{V_\alpha}$ is a partition of $p^{-1}(U)$ into slices, and $C$ is a closed set of $B$ such that $C \subset U$, then $p^{-1}(C) \cap V_\alpha$ is a closed set of $E$.]*
2. If $B$ is compact and $p^{-1}(b)$ is finite for each $b \in B$, then $E$ is compact.
</div>

---
