---
layout: problemset_topology_munkres2e
title: Section 54 The Fundamental Group of the Circle
parent: Chapter 9 The Fundamental Group
grand_parent: Topology, Munkres 2e Solutions
permalink: topology_munkres_solutions/section54
nav_order: 54
---

* TOC
{:toc}

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 54.1
What goes wrong with the 'path-lifting lemma' (Lemma 54.1) for the local homeomorphism of Example 2 of Section 53.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 54.2
In defining the map $\tilde{F}$ in the proof of Lemma 54.2, why were we so careful about the order in which we considered the small rectangles?

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 54.3
Let $p: E \to B$ be a covering map. Let $\alpha$ and $\beta$ be paths in $B$ with $\alpha(1) = \beta(0)$. Let $\tilde\alpha$ and $\tilde\beta$ be liftings of them such that $\tilde\alpha(1) = \tilde\beta(0)$. Show that $\tilde\alpha * \tilde\beta$ is a lifting of $\alpha * \beta$.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 54.4

Consider the covering map $p: \R \times R_+ \to \R^2 - 0$ of Example 53.6. Find the liftings of the paths

$$
\begin{align*}
  f(t) &= (2-t, 0), \\
  g(t) &= ((1+t)\cos(2\pi{t}), (1+t)\sin(2\pi{t})), \\
  h(t) &= f * g
\end{align*}
$$

Sketch these paths and their liftings.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 54.5
Consider the covering map $p \times p: \R \times \R \to S^1 \times S^1$ of Example 53.4. Consider the path

$$
f(t) = (\cos(2\pi{t}), \sin(2\pi{t})) \times (\cos(4\pi{t}), \sin(4\pi{t}))
$$

in $S^1 \times S^1$. Sketch what $f$ looks like when $S^1 \times S^1$ is identified with the doughnut surface $D$. Find a lifting $\tilde{f}$ of $f$ to $\R \times \R$, and sketch it.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 54.6
Consider the maps $g, h: S^1 \to S^1$ given $g(z) = z^n$ and $h(z) = 1/z^n$. (Here, we represent $S^1$ as the set of complex numbers $z$ of absolute value $1$.) Compute the induced homomorphisms $g_\*, h_\*$ of the infinite cyclic group $\pi_1(S^1, b_0)$ into itself.
*[Hint. Recall the equation $(\cos\theta + i\sin\theta)^n = \cos(n\theta) + i\sin(n\theta)$.]*

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 54.7
Generalize the proof of Theorem 54.5 to show that the fundamental group of the torus is isomorphic to the group $\Z \times \Z$.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 54.8
Let $p: E \to B$ be a covering map, with $E$ path connected. Show that if $B$ is simply connected, then $p$ is a homeomorphism.

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.
Assume that $B$ is simply-connected. Since $p$ is a covering map, $p$ is continuous and surjective.
1. WTS that $p$ is injective.

   Fix $b_o \in B$. WTS that $p\inv(b_0)$ either has one element or is empty.
   Let $$ \begin{align*}
    \Phi: \fundgroup(B, b_0) &\to p\inv(b_0) \\
    [f] &\mapsto [\tilde{f}(1)]
   \end{align*}
   $$ be the lifting correspondence.
   By Theorem 54.4 and $E$ being path-connected, $\Phi$ is surjective.
   Since $B$ is simply connected, $\fundgroup(B, b_0) = \set{1}$ and $\Phi$ is injective.
   Therefore, $\set{1} \isom p\inv(b_0)$ and $p\inv(b_0)$ has one element.
2. To show that $p$ is a homeomorphism, it suffices to show that $p$ is bijective, continuous, and open. We'll prove the last condition using a lemma.

Therefore, $p$ is a homeomorphism.

---

**Lemma.** Let $p: E \to B$ be a covering map. Then $p$ is open.

**Proof.** Let $V \subseteq E$ be open. WTS that $p(V) \subset B$ is open. Let $b_0 \in p(V)$.

Since $p$ is a covering map, there exists a nbhd $U \subseteq B$ of $b_0$ that is evenly covered by $p$. That is, there exists a partition $\set{V_\alpha}_{\alpha \in J}$ of $p\inv(U)$ of disjoint open subsets in $E$ such that for all $\alpha \in J$, $p\restrict{V\_\alpha}: V\_\alpha \to U$ is a homeomorphism.

Fix $\alpha \in J$. Then, there exists $e_0 \in V_\alpha$ such that $p(e_0) = b_0$.

Define $V' = V \cap V_\alpha$. Then, $V'$ is open in $E$. Since $p\restrict{V\_\alpha}$ is a homeomorphism, $p(V')$ is open in $B$ and is a subset of $p(V)$.

Therefore, $p(V)$ is open.

</div>

---
