---
layout: problemset_topology_munkres2e
title: Section 1 Simplices
parent: Chapter 1 Homology Group of a Simplicial Complex
grand_parent: Elements of Algebraic Topology, Munkres Solutions
permalink: algtop_munkres_solutions/section1
nav_order: 1
---

* TOC
{:toc}

---

<div class='problem_stmt completed' markdown='1'>

### Problem 1.1(a)
Verify properties (1) of simplices. That is, show that the barycentric coordinates $t_i(x)$ of $x$ with respect to $a_0, \dots, a_n$ are continuous functions of $x$.

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>
Hint: If $T$ is the affine transformation carrying $a_0$ to $0$ and $a_i$ to $\varepsilon_i$, then $T$ carries the point

$$
  x = \sum_{i=0}^{n}t_ia_i
$$

to the point $(t_1, \dots, t_n, 0, \dots, 0)$.
</div>

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.
Recall the following:

<div class='problem_notes' markdown='1'>

**Lemma A**. Let $f: \R^N \to \R^N$ be defined by $f(x)=x+a$ for some $a \in \R^N$. Here, $f$ is called a translation. Then, $f$ is continuous.

**Lemma B**. Let $f: X \to Y$ be a linear map with $X$, $Y$ being normed vector spaces and $X$ finite-dimensional. Then, [$f$ is continuous.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discontinuous_linear_map)

**Corollary C**. All affine transformations are continuous.

</div>

Define $\sigma$ to be $n$-simplex spanned by $a_0, \dots, a_n$.

Define $T_1: \R^n \to \R^n$ by $x \mapsto x - a_0$. Then $T_1$ is continuous since it's a translation map. Observe that for $x \in \sigma$,

$$\begin{align*}
  x - a_0
    &= \sum_{i=0}^n{t_ia_i} - a_0 \\
    &= \sum_{i=0}^n{t_ia_i} - \paren{\sum_{i=0}^n{t_i}}(a_0) \\
    &= \sum_{i=1}^n{t_i(a_i - a_0)}
\end{align*}$$

Recall that $\set{a_1 - a_0, \dots, a_n - a_0}$ is a linearly independent set. Let $\set{e_1, \dots, e_n}$ be the standard basis vectors for $\R^n$. Both of these sets span $\R^n$.

Define transformation $T_2: \R^n \to \R^n$ by

$$
  \sum_{i=1}^n{t_i(a_i - a_0)}
  \mapsto \sum_{i=1}^n{t_ie_i}
$$

Then, $T_2$ is a linear map and is therefore continuous.

Finally, for $i = 1, \dots, n$, define $P_i: \R^n \to \R$ by

$$
  \sum_{j=1}^n{t_je_j} \mapsto t_i
$$

This is a projection map and is continuous.

For $i = 0$, define $P_0: \R^n \to \R$ by

$$
  \sum_{j=1}^n{t_je_j} \mapsto 1 - \sum_{j=1}^n{t_j}
$$

This is a polynomial on the coordinates of $\R^n$ and is therefore, continuous.

For $i = 0, \dots, n$, define $\pi_i: \sigma \to \R$ as the composition $x \mapsto (P_i \circ T_2 \circ T_1)(x)$. WTS that this is indeed the projection map from $x \in \sigma$ to its barycentric coordinates.

Let $i = 0$. Then,

$$\begin{align*}
  \pi_0(x) &= (P_0 \circ T_2 \circ T_1)(x) \\
    &= (P_0 \circ T_2 \circ T_1)\paren{\sum_{i=0}^n{t_ia_i}} \\
    &= (P_0 \circ T_2)\paren{\sum_{i=1}^n{t_i(a_i - a_0)}} \\
    &= P_0\paren{\sum_{i=1}^n{t_ie_i}} \\
    &= 1 - \sum_{i=1}^n{t_i}
    = t_0
\end{align*}$$  

Let $i \in \set{1, \dots, n}$. Then,

$$\begin{align*}
  \pi_i(x) &= (P_i \circ T_2 \circ T_1)(x) \\
    &= (P_i \circ T_2 \circ T_1)\paren{\sum_{i=0}^n{t_ia_i}} \\
    &= (P_i \circ T_2)\paren{\sum_{i=1}^n{t_i(a_i - a_0)}} \\
    &= P_i\paren{\sum_{i=1}^n{t_ie_i}} \\
    &= t_i
\end{align*}$$  

Therefore, the barycentric projection map is continuous.

</div>

---

<div class='problem_stmt in_progress' markdown='1'>

### Problem 1.1(b)
Verify properties (2) of simplices. That is, show that $\sigma$ equals the union of all line segments joining $a_0$ to the points of the simplex $s$ spanned by $a_1, \dots, a_0$. Two such line segments intersect only in the point $a_0$.

{: .no_toc}
#### Proof.




</div>
